That's good, right?
Yeah.
How's it going?
Check, check.
Good morning.
Jeff, are you a comedian, by any chance?
No, really.
In front of me.
I won't put you on the spot.
I'm going to ask you to make a joke.
Okay, I appreciate that.
So, let's do a quick time check.
I'm going to reset our timer.
We'll start our timer.
Hello.
Oh my gosh.
Can we get a little bit more enthusiasm?
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
So, first of all,
they gave me microphones.
I have to thank some people.
First of all, a big welcome to
the Make Money class,
all the way from SFCC,
Chantell (Dr SV),
Landis,
Emerging Entrepreneurs.
Is there anyone else in the room?
Can I give a shout out to Jeff?
I don't know.
I saw Rusty somewhere.
Say hi to Rusty.
Hey, there you are.
There's Ginny.
So, welcome everyone.
We're going to get started.
My name is Mayowa
and I am
our co-founder of AMPL Labs
and I'm here with Jeff
from Arts Hub.
And we're going to be talking a little bit about
how they make money and run.
And if you go on to the next slide,
AMPL Labs
is an art and technology
studio.
We make money through consulting,
teaching, installations,
and things like that.
And now Jeff is going to talk a little bit more
about Arts Hub,
how they make money, and kick off for us
the presentation.
Hey, everyone. Excited to be here.
As Mayowa said, my name is Jeff Andersen.
I'm one of the founders of Arts Hub,
which is a non-profit here in
Albuquerque.
And we do a lot of different things.
We
make money. We do a variety of things.
We make money through
grants. We make money through
philanthropy, so like donations.
We make money through government contracts.
We make money through earned revenues,
so sales of goods or services.
And so
we're going to touch on
a little bit of those about the sales
of goods or services. This is more about
how you procure funding in other
ways.
Alright, so
what's really cool, what I love about
grants or funding applications,
whether it's grants, or fellowships,
or artist residencies,
or any other way that you're trying to
get someone to pay money back for the non-service
selling of goods or service,
is oftentimes it's about telling
a really interesting story.
And what's really cool is as artists and
creatives, we're really good at telling stories,
which is fantastic.
And when I realized that, I started
writing grants in 2007. It took me
about 2012, 2013.
I'm like, oh, I don't have to tell stories.
I'm a theater artist. I'm trained in theater.
I'm trained how to tell stories, right?
And there's a reason why
books and Hollywood movies
are compelling to a lot of people
is because they work within a
story structure that a lot of people can recognize
whether they know it or not.
And so,
one of the things I think that a lot of people
maybe skip
when they're doing funding applications
is setting context.
In particular,
what's the world like? And even more
particularly, how does this
relate to what the founder's vision is?
Because every founder,
whether they are
a grantor or a government entity,
they're learning something, right?
They see a problem in the world, or they see
something missing in the world.
And so,
understanding what their vision is,
how they see the world as it
exists, and how they're hoping that
this funding will change the world
is really important.
I've reviewed a lot of grants
in my time,
and
I think one of the biggest things is people
don't pay attention to what
the funder wants, right?
And writing to them. And of course,
when you're doing loans
or other types of things
that are equity or investments, right?
The great thing is the change they want to see in the world is they want to make more money.
But when it comes to grants,
residencies,
fellowships,
calls for art even,
they're wanting to have a vision.
What's their vision?
When you look on their website, they look for their
requests for proposals or RFPs
or their calls for art.
Or they'll just straight up tell you, right?
This place is missing art. We want art in this place.
We don't see
these type of artists
getting the support they need.
We want, you know,
one of the things, the national parks,
I don't know if they have this anymore,
where they usually have artist residencies in each national park.
And their big vision was
they want people to know about and love and appreciate
national parks, so more people go to the
national park, right? That's their vision.
They want people to explore the beauty and the majesty
of their national park.
Cool.
So,
I'm disconnected because I'm just on my computer here.
Alright, so real quick,
I'm just curious
the kinds of artists we have in this room.
If you make 2D visual art,
painting of any kind, raise your hand.
If you make
3D visual art or crafts,
raise your hand.
If you are a musician
of any kind, raise your hand.
Theater artists, like me.
Any theater artists in this room?
Fantastic. Dancers?
Fantastic.
Do we have any media or project-driven
projection artists or
projection happening artists or
interactive visual media artists in this room?
Fantastic.
Do I miss anything?
Writing, film, yes, of course.
You know, those obscure words.
Right.
What else?
Arts therapy. Love arts therapy.
Speakers.
Speakers, actually speaking is our
own song. Fantastic.
So there is
an impromptu view, right?
Because we can list out all kinds of
arts.
Fantastic. So,
our superpower as artists is
we're curious. And we also
have a vision, right? We want to
tell the story, and tell the stories
in some form or fashion. We want to make people feel.
We want to change people's perspective.
We want to bring a smile to people's face.
We want to make people think.
We want to raise awareness about an issue.
Whatever it is,
that's a really powerful place to start, right?
And so
one of the things I think that's really important
to think about is as an artist,
what makes your perspective,
your vision unique?
But it's a superpower, right?
And if you don't have an answer to that right now,
no worries. That's really important. If you're going to go out for
this kind of learning, think about it.
Think about what makes you unique, right?
It doesn't necessarily mean you're the only person who thinks about
something, you know, who thinks about it the right way.
But what makes you stand out from the crowd?
It's a really
important part to answer.
And what drives you, right?
Why do you make it? But why
is the next step? But why it comes from
what you do, and your vision, and your
curiosity, right? But why do you make the art
that you make, right?
And again,
if your answer currently is like,
because I like to make the art,
I'm a theater artist. I do theater
primarily because it's fun.
It's a great way to
connect with people.
But
understand if you're something more than that, right?
And particularly, they want your why
to match with their vision
of the world, right?
If you're wondering about social activism
or political activism, right?
And your why has something to do with political activism,
you're probably not a good match.
If their why is
like a national park, if their why is like
we want people to appreciate the natural beauty
of this park, we want people to come here, right?
Think about who your why might fit into that.
If you're a photographer,
one way or another, if you're a photographer, right?
Your why to a national park residency is
because I want to take pictures.
Your why is, I want to
come to this national park.
I want to tell people to appreciate
the beauty and the majesty of this
national park and
maybe have a very unique
perspective that you can bring to that.
I think origin story is
something too that's really powerful as
an artist, right? That's where your why
comes from. For me,
I grew up right here in Albuquerque. I grew up
outside. I grew up
playing on the mesa.
Before it was closed off,
which it is now.
You could just run up there and
you could have picnics in the volcanoes.
You know, run around
the lava rocks.
And one of the things I really loved
doing about that was going out there
with my friends and
making worlds, right?
Making brand new worlds out of nothing.
Because as
kids we had some agency, right?
We had complete control over where those worlds were.
We could connect better.
We'd understand each other better through play
and storytelling. We would
explore the mesa, right? We would
get to know the mesa. There's a little spot
on there I can tell you where my little pirate was.
To this day I can point to it.
Because it helped us explore the natural
world. It helped us connect.
It helped us tell our own stories.
That's powerful.
And that really relates to why
I started going into theater.
Theater allows you to tell your own
stories. To connect with people.
To maybe
you're telling your story about
a place, right? To highlight
the good and bad of that place
and really help people understand what
that place is. Or maybe you're
coming from a different perspective
that you think is maybe missing
in the world today, right?
But my
great theater gift is fun
because theater builds community.
Theater builds connections. Theater allows
people to tell stories in a way that
people can hear, right?
It's not arguing on Facebook
where people won't get hard positions,
right? Maybe you can tell a story that makes people go
oh, I never thought about that
way. It makes people laugh.
And when you laugh
together in a room with someone, even if you don't
know them, there is...
your brain is more
your brain goes I'm connected to them.
I'm closer to them now because we share our life.
So these
reasons and more are why I
create theater, right? And that's
more compelling of a why
to a founder in
I make theater because it's fun.
And I get to be on stage and
run around.
Yup.
Hello.
Your's working?
Yes?
No?
No.
Oh, there we go. All right, sweet.
So it's working on like theater's cool and fun, right?
Like there might be
funners out there.
The Surgeon General in 2023
made loneliness as an epitome.
Whenever I write grants for theater,
I use that, right?
It brings people together. It connects them.
It gets them out of the house.
It gets them in the same space.
It gives them something to talk about and connect.
Even if you don't know someone, you see a show
You have something to talk about. You have something
to connect with. You have
whatever issues or whatever that play was talking about,
you can talk about it, right? It builds community.
It builds connection. And it addresses
a lonely and sad epidemic.
Did I think that when I was thinking about
the play that I was wanting to do? No.
When I was auditioning for something? No.
But the theater does do that.
And every art form does something like that, right?
In some professions.
So thinking about your why, and really
think about your origin story.
Why did you start making the art that you wanted to make?
And often times, that
can help you think
that you're walking through your art.
So I'm going to pass it off to Mayowa, who's going to tell us about
his origin story.
Yeah, so the thing that Jeff is
doing right now is called "translation".
And if
we have some of the
resources we have at the end
are literally about how to translate
your art practice.
Because the difference between saying
"I do plays"
and "I
help solve
the loneliness epidemic
by connecting people powerfully
in community"
is how you translate
your art practice to funder speak.
Because funders often think
very academically.
And you have to do a little bit of work to just translate
the work you do into
what they're funding.
And for me,
I started
my background
is in music technology.
So I
one of my pivotal moments
was creating an instrument called
OrchAsstra, which basically
let you play music with your butt.
And the reason I
did it was because
me and Michael
are pretty stupid. It made us laugh.
To try to
translate into academic
language, we wanted to create
a way for people to play together.
We wanted creativity
and music making
to be a community
event and a community activity.
Because I can write a song
but it's way more fun if we
can get a bunch of people to
write a song together with their
butts.
So, next slide.
In terms of how this connects to my
original story, I always
been the little troll.
You can see from the left.
Those are my brothers, like, size 17
Nike's or whatever.
But every time I've
been interested in technology,
so like, for example, the same
face tracking technology that
pounds here uses to put people
in prison, I was like, hey,
can I put pizza
on my face?
Or, what we've seen
at the bottom there is me and my co-founder
literally using the kind of sensors
that tech villains use for surveillance.
And that's what we're bringing to
furniture so that we can, you know,
detach when people are interacting
with our installation.
So then again, that has
been a constant part of
my original story, just humor
and fun and
using and recontextualizing
technology, usually about
tech. And if you go to the next
slide.
Yeah, all of this just goes out to
the why it's powerful.
Like, the reason that we're doing
art.
There's usually an underlying
desire driving your work, whether it's to
connect people, whether
it's to connect to our communities.
There's always this underlying "why" that's really
powerful. And the next
slide, please.
And I think
part of, as you start showing your
why,
and start thinking about your art
in that way, it's
very likely that you're already doing
something that funders are really
interested in, right? You're already building
a world. So if you're
an event
person or a dancer,
you probably are already
bringing people together powerfully to like
connect to the community. And all
of that is like, you're already
creating a type of world.
And I think the more you think of
the work you're doing is something inherently
valuable. And
the more it aligns with how you're already
building a world,
it's also a really
great opportunity to show funders
that people are already doing things like
this. Because the thing is, like a lot
of funders and people without grants,
they sometimes are shy
about taking risks on untested
people or untested ideas.
So the more you can say, the more you
do this, the more you're building this world,
the more successful you will be in
finding funders who want to do
the work that you are interested in
doing. So now I'm going to
connect it to Jeff to take us to our
next act, which is
a hero emerges.
What does that mean, Jeff?
That's right. So, alright, so what do you understand
to your why, right? I think
the one thing I have made it into kind of is
your why lives in context
not only the funders vision
of the community that you create in, right?
And I think that's something important to
help
funders understand. I was writing a grant
for it, this was an arts grant, but someone was doing
a statewide education program.
And the founder was in
Rhode Island, I think,
tiny state, right?
Tiny, tiny state. And they
they
this non-profit was like, I know
we're a good fit. We've been in the community
for nine, five years in a row, but we're a good
fit. We want to bring you all in
to help. How can we
get this? So I just called the founder and I was like, hey, what's up?
You have a friend of them, we think they're a good fit, too.
Can you give us any feedback?
And they're like, well, we don't understand, like
why do you need so much travel
and lodging and
food stipends, like
why? And I was like, oh,
you live in Rhode Island, so driving across
the state may just be you could
drive there and drive back in the same day.
We're driving across the state of New Mexico
and that's at least a night, right?
It's at least a day or if you're going from one corner
to the next, you're sending like multiple
people, right? That's travel, that's
hundreds of miles, that's lodging, that's right.
So I don't think the funders
understand the context in which you're creating
and sometimes you're really powerful, especially
if they're not from the state. So
context, right? Why,
where you're creating, the community you're creating within,
and then the hero origins, right?
Every story, like something,
a hero, something happens to change the
status quo, right?
Or address a problem that
superhero music villain comes in
and then the hero origins, right?
That's you. That's your art.
That's your community, depending
on the thunder you're talking to.
But mostly it's you, right?
Your art, your
creativity, you as an artist,
as the person who's going to change the conditions
that the thunder is hoping
changes in the world, right?
And I think a lot of people misunderstand
funding as purely transactional,
right? You kind of
feel like,
please sir, can I have some more, right? Like
money, please.
But it's the opposite,
right? You're giving them an opportunity
to invest in
the change, right?
You're giving them an opportunity to invest in your art,
which is cool, because you've already told them
why it's cool, and
you're giving them an opportunity. They will be selling
that to fund you, right? That's a mindset shift
that I think a lot of people can go into in funding.
You're not going there begging for money.
You're giving them an opportunity.
And you're giving them an opportunity to partner with you,
right? You're not going like,
hey, give me money and then I'll go in
and do my thing. Like, hey,
why don't we do this together?
If you give them resources, and my talent,
and my vision, we can change
the world. We can make the world a better
place, right? And that's what they want
to hear. They don't want to just hear, like,
I don't have any money,
so I need some, please.
They want to hear,
I have a vision, and that visual
aligns with your vision, and if you give me
the resources to make this happen,
this is going to be amazing, and the world
is going to be a better place for it, right?
And there are also different ways
to, like, some funders, it depends who they are,
right? Some of them, like, on the website,
they're like, please don't call us, please just
submit the application, right? But sometimes you can
reach out to funders, especially if it's outside
the funding cycle. That's a big tip.
If it's outside the funding cycle and they have contact
information, call them, email
them, right? Ask them, like,
this is my idea, this is my project,
I think it's really cool, I think it's a fit, do you think it's
a fit? I don't know, sometimes I tell you,
I'm like, eh, it's not really what we're looking for.
We're like, I guess you should apply.
Which isn't a guarantee, right? But you can follow
those relationships.
And there's a big difference. I've read so many grants
that essentially are like, hey, give me a paintbrush
so I can paint them.
I want a paintbrush. And that makes
sense, right? You're like, we need to talk
about what you're going to use their money for.
But you're not using their money for
a paintbrush, the paintbrush is a tool
to
paint a picture together.
You're asking them to paint a picture together.
And of course, whatever your
art form is.
But if you're a visual artist, you're not asking
for a paintbrush or a paint job canvas.
You're asking them to paint a picture together.
To partner with you.
To get in on the ground floor.
I was at a
workshop the other day and someone was like,
they
went to a pitch competition that was
both, like, tech bros
and artists.
There was a huge difference. The tech bros would come out and be like,
you're so lucky and I'm here?
And you're so lucky you had the opportunity
to invest in me.
So they said that exactly.
And I was like,
hey,
I'm so lucky to be here.
And I really hope you like me.
And that's the attitude
that a lot of people write funding proposals with.
I hope, please,
they save me money.
No, no, you're lucky
you're in my application.
The attitude, right?
I was like, I'm awesome.
I'm super cool. This is amazing.
And all I need is your partnership
to make this thing amazing
and wouldn't it be cool if you had the opportunity
to partner with me.
By giving me the resources and unleashing my talent
and my vision and creativity
on the world.
So some things to look at too, right?
It's a relationship, right?
Look at past funding.
Is your practice
and do you see yourself reflected
in that funding industry?
Particularly like the types of art
or what the art is saying, right?
Do you see yourself reflected in some way?
Good indication that you might be a good applicant.
If you don't, move on to the next one.
Don't bang your head against the wall
about finding opportunities that you already have
such a waste of time
and don't do it right.
Look at their funding history.
Do their values
match your values?
Don't, also don't
tie yourself in the knots
going after something that doesn't match your values
because then you're also going to be turning into a contract
where you have to do the work that you said you were going to do
and you're going to be doing work that conflicts with your values
and I agree with that as well.
That's great.
But that's going to really tighten the knots.
So do their values, can you genuinely
connect with their values?
That means they can probably genuinely connect with their values.
And then is there a line in the overlap
between the vision that they want to see?
They'll tell you straight up
this funding is to do this.
Can you do that with your heart?
And how can you tell them that you can do that
with your heart?
Maybe one thing I can also add
to that, Jeff, is
why don't you start thinking
relationally or
rather than transactionally
then the funding
opportunities and the work and the impact
usually goes beyond funding, right?
So there have been many times
where I haven't got the grant
but it's turned to more work
with that group because we were
aligned and because it's clear
that I was trying to build a world they were aligned with.
And then the other side
is like, I don't know
if there's a couple of people from Santa Fe here
but like they have this
artist of solution grant
and a lot of folks who get it
usually get more money.
You know, it's not just a one time
thing and
you have the artist solution to dispose
but often you can go out to the funder
and you say, hey, here's the stuff you're doing together
here's the world
here's the world you're painting together
so let's keep
that alive.
One more thing to add
that you made me think of.
Let's keep the world alive.
You get money sometimes
you get some funding and another funder will
be like, ooh that's very cool.
So also have any awards, you can have
any training you have, any other grants you've got
any other residency fellowships
like, you know, people are people, you're still
around with people and you're like, oh someone else trusts them
and maybe they don't know who that fellowship came from
and someone else trusts them
we can trust them too, right?
So anything you have that's a credential
or an award or anything like that
highlight it, your experience. You've been doing it
for 10 years, that's good for the
funder to know.
And another thing too, I think a lot of people
and this depends on the funder right too
I always tell people, yeah sometimes you want to
academicize
that's a word
you're suffering from stats
and studies and what not
and saying, this will do this, we know this because the study
from Harvard University said if you do this
then people are better off
but you also want to be careful
don't write in
you're not writing a research paper, you're not writing
a PhD level research paper, right?
Your sentence structure, you're vocabulary
your sentence structure should be a fourth grade
reading level. You do not want
your funders reading the sentence
twice, if you can call it
you want it to be like full, got it
got it, got it. They're reading maybe
hundreds of applications in a week
right? They don't want to be like, what did
this paragraph mean? Because they might just say
no points right, I don't want to reread that in that time
or they just subconsciously
like, I have to read this again and I don't know how
to write, so make it easy for them to comprehend
and use the vocabulary level
that they are using and use the words
that they are using. If they say creatives
you're creative in your application
if they say artists, you're an artist in your application
right? That's one of the easiest ones
but like, parrot their language back to them
parrot their definitions back to them
they say, we want art
national art shows, we want art
that will highlight
the beauty of national art so more people
will come to it. You could write
a sentence in your application
my proposal is
to help people understand the beauty of national
art so that they were like, visited
and this is happening right? Tell them exactly how
you connect to it
and then lastly, just a little touch on
loans, equity, investment
they need to be attached to your ride
but they also need to be attached to
how are you going to
recruit their investment and how quickly
will they recruit their investment
which is a lot of
financials and budgets and business plans
right? Which leads us to
hang on, let's talk about
the budget. Can I make a quick
ok, maybe
that's fine
I was going to say one other thing
Jeff is saying something
about academicizing
language
is anyone aware what heuristic is
what heuristics are, just shout it out
if you know
it just means a shortcut
so remember
if you're reading
I want to say it because
Jeff is saying alright your 4th grade level
and parodying your language
back to them, those shortcuts
any kind of thing you can do
that connects the work you're doing
to the language you're using
is a shortcut for them, they don't have to be like
what is it that you guys do
and if you say, if they're
looking for artists in public places
that connects big communities
and you say
why school is a theater
circus arts
company that connects people powerfully
and community, they'll be like
these are our people
so that's the shortcut that you want to continue to hook to
and another shortcut is
what is the name of your program called
because often
like I said, if you're reading 50 out of 100 grants
how am I going to remember
which one is everything, so the more
memorable your name is
the more it reflects the goals
of the funder, the easier
it is for them to think of you
when they're scoring
so now I'm going to talk about budgets
and I'm going to talk about
a certain
art collective in New Mexico
that
this was posted
by the CEO of a popular art collective
in New Mexico
and they were talking, they posted on LinkedIn
they were talking about the good old days
and they talked about
how when they did their first
installation out of New Mexico
they all paid their way down
they slept in one hotel room
you can't really see
but there's like five sleeping bags
here and basically
one of the things that they were
really excited about was like no one got paid
and you probably know what I'm talking about
but unsurprisingly
this is an art collective that has issues
with compensation and labour relations
and things like that
because the things that they're speculating on
send a message
and that's part of why I'm going to talk about your budget
because the budget is usually
in the face of people when they're writing
rounds of funds are really like
you know, you think it's
the last minute because it's like
quote unquote
hard and also easy
but it's really important if you go to the next slide
to make sure
your funding and your budget
reflects your
proposal
so for a recent
commission graph
I wrote it around
connecting
wrote around the plaza in Santa Fe
and connecting with community and
indigenous artists
so if you look at
if you go to the next slide
I donated my time
but the majority of the money
goes towards
Indigenous artists or honorariums for
youth and other workshops
and cultural consultants
so how you're allocating money
and how things spread out
also can reinforce your work
in an important way
so again
if you're saying you really care about artists
and you don't pay artists
as part of your grant
that gives you signs of red flags and funders
because remember we're looking for shortcuts
the reviewers are looking for
shortcuts and heuristics
so yeah
so if you have anything more to add
yeah and I think like
not only is your budget like a moral document
budgets are
whether it's government or
organization budgets, moral documents
it's really bringing resources
but also make sure
that it aligns
so again now I'm not trying to get someone to talk about
we do this after school program
the way they talk about it it sounded like they were on school campuses
in their merit
they didn't mention field trips, they didn't mention going places
they didn't mention
bus people, well one of the biggest lines
in their budget was buses
but they didn't talk about that at all
in the grant right
and so it was very confusing
well why do you need office money for buses
if you're not taking kids places
and I'm sure they were
but that was one of the things
and especially if it was a government grant
and we had a very specific ruler we had to follow
so I couldn't make that leap for them
nope they didn't mention that
so the budget did not align with their narrative
and I think I get it right
so make sure what you mentioned in your budget
is mentioned in your narrative
what's mentioned in your narrative is mentioned in your budget
and actually Jeff I think
oh this is me
so I mean a critical part
and we've been hinting at this the entire time
a critical part of
being a good
funding applicant is really
saying like hey
we're going to build a new world together
and I think this part
of your proposal
and kind of inviting people
and showing them the impact
how you've used the money
to create a new world
is like this part
and probably the most critical part
a lot of people hate
grant reporting compliance
but this is really an amazing opportunity
to show them like hey
this is what came out from
partnering with us
this is a new world we've created
and again
you're always
tying this back to the founder goals
so whatever
you initially told them
you're excited to do
whatever your mission and why
it's connected to
this is where you really need to go back
and show that
and if you show me the next slide please
so yeah
because
when you show
it's not just enough to say we've created
a better world you know
you can't just be like trust me bro we did it
you have to show
show your work, show your impact
show your return, show the new world
and maybe go to the next slide
and Jeff
I'm going to invite you to talk a little bit
about the compliance
and grant reporting
because the way you say it
your budget is a moral
in terms of what you're going to do
what you're going to spend on and what you're going to change
your report
and the story you tell after
is also kind of a moral
document
absolutely, so almost every founder will ask for a report
the nicest ones are like
send us a paragraph and an email
some of you will ask for a really long report
it just depends on who they are
it doesn't usually depend on the size of the grant either
that's one thing
it's just kind of a side note
when you're looking at the funding
also look at the requirements to fulfill the funding
sometimes the requirements to fulfill the funding
will cost more than the grant gets
seriously
sometimes I actually get
$500 grants and I'm like
this grant is going to take me 10 hours to write
it's going to take me 10 hours to report
that's 20 hours
that's more than half
the grant alright
if you're considering your time
as writing and
recording for the grant
that's more than half the grant already
is it worth it?
that's just a side note, it doesn't even funders who are like
$500 really don't report
I just don't go after them
but yeah
your reporting, your compliance
almost every founder will have some sort of reporting
and again it usually ties back to what you wrote
in your proposal
and I always talk about
change, like what's the change
almost every founder wants some sort of
story
data, pictures
some sort of combination of all three
most funders will want some sort of data
and most funders are like yeah
a new gallery
500 people show up
world changed
but that's an output
output are the things or people
you can count
how many paintings were created, how many plays
were performed, how many people came
how many
things did you buy for your education program
things you can count, right
outcomes are
changes to behaviors
conditions or circumstances
so behaviors are
people are gonna act a different way, right
they're gonna see my work and they're gonna be like
oh my gosh, I have
not been recycling and that's been
destroying the world, I'm gonna change
that behavior, right
or maybe it's just like a
perception, right
or
conditions, which are like
internal, right, they're gonna feel better about
themselves, they're gonna feel more
represented or seen
or circumstances more
external, right, they're gonna live in a community
that's more connected, they're gonna live in a community
where people are more willing and
interested in engaging in conversations, right
the cool thing about art
whether you have
measured this before or not, your art does something
it changes something
internally, it changes people's perspectives
it makes people happy
it gives people a boost
it brings people together, it changes something
and typically
what if I'm just
naming that, not so much
in like fellowships
or residencies, but like
grants or government contracts
they're definitely about some sort of
outcome, right
and sometimes it's a simple survey
like people will leave your gallery
opening and they like
you have like two questions
where they put some dots on it
like do you feel happier after going through
this, yes or no?
did you meet someone you didn't meet
that you've never met before today
yes or no?
I've helped a local theater company
develop their data and grant recording
and one of the things is like they ask
did you engage in conversation with someone
after the show?
yes or no?
did you see work from an artist
that you've never seen before?
you know, that's
you're seeing people's perspectives
they do work outside of theaters
so they ask like
does this make you more likely
to come to shows when it's not
in a traditional theater space, when it's somewhere in your neighborhood?
things like that, super simple
super easy, and they really kind of
just stick you guys in the way out
you don't have to do surveys or whatnot
it can honestly be qualitative
you can ask people, people who came to your show
or your event or your art, you can talk to them
and they're like hey, we interviewed 20 people
and here's what they said
and this is how life changed
here's some pictures that prove that we did the thing
and stuff like that
fellowships and residencies often are about
a change in you as an artist
and will you grow
and in your practice, will you get more skills
will you make more connections, will you
be more inspired, right?
so things like that, like
in this farm, random farming in Connecticut
you just want to, like
I saw it was like, the goal of this residency
is to get people to know about the beauty
of our natural landscape up here
in Connecticut, right? and we do that by
offering our farm up for 6 weeks
on all these materials and supplies
so one of the things you probably want to write on an application is like
boy,
as long as I can tell, your natural landscape
is really inspiring and it's going to help
me be inspired to create more art
creating up there, right? so fellowships and
residencies are often about, like, the change in you
but if you also are typically like,
that's going to change what you do back in the community
and that's going to change your community
even more powerful
and maybe one thing
one thing that's worth saying is like
you are probably undercounting
your impact
especially if you're moving through the world
that aligns with
your mission and your child's gifts
you probably don't even know
the impact that you're making in the world
which makes it a little hard to count
but
I have a little
maybe trick and this
kind of comes from
I'm a recovering Tech Bruh :(
and I did what I had to do to survive
in the Bay Area
and I'm not proud of it
but one of the things I learned is like
"creative accounting"
you know...
AKA "fraud" in the Bay Area
here, it's just learning
how to properly count things
so for example, you have an event
in a gallery
and Jeff talked about the 500 people that came to your show
those 500 people
probably had dinner
or drinks in the neighborhood
so part of your impact
is community
development and economic development
because you being
there on that block
you're probably making it easier for businesses
you're making those streets safer
because they're more likely
even if you're a muralist
because
people are in that community
looking at art
maybe they're even seeing their identities reflected back
to them in those
murals
you're doing creative placemaking
you're making it feel safer
for people to be in that community
so part of
what I would say is like
your documentation
documentation
is often the thing that
artists and creatives
suck at
you really have to really change your relationship to it
because these are the stories
that you're going to tell
that will continue
that are compelling for your funders
they're the things that are going to help fill your own cup
when you're like
I mean to be honest
our industry is prone to burnout
so knowing
that just having
a conversation with your neighbor
at the gallery who said oh you guys have a show tonight
we had a bunch of people come through
those are all data points
your data point doesn't have to be like
sending an email being like
do you feel more or less
rated from 1 to 5
it can be just
the things you see, the relationships
like you said the conversations
so that's all part of the data
every time
and now Jeff if you take us to the next slide
well I guess
Jeff come up here with me
because we should talk about this together
because Jeff why
in a
talk that was supposed to be about
funding and money
why did we talk about why people were
important and self esteem and
why didn't you actually like
do what is said along the description
and talk to people about
like procurement
yeah so we
because
and this is not surprising
but art does have to right
and I think we do ourselves a disservice
a lot when we talk to folks
especially if we're like
outside of the arts field
we're like this is like maybe
a health grant about community
connection
we do ourselves a disservice of like
I know you really usually fund this kind of stuff and it's not like therapy
but like please
but like no art is the most
powerful tool to bring people together around it
like the hard stuff
it brings people together in
constructed positive
ways that nothing else
can match
it has a huge economic impact
there's a million data points out there
economic impacts of the arts
it improves mental health
it's
it's one of the most powerful
education tools that you can have in schools
it's a way for people to be
seen and recognized and recognized to learn stories
reflected back at them which just has
a myriad of benefits right
and art is just cool
and fun so art matters
and I think one of the most important things
is helping people understand why
art matters but not tiptoeing into it
it matters kind of like
art really matters
and my art in particular
for this rank matters and here's why
and here's why you would be lucky to find me
and
some of those data points
the research that you can find
you can find research about arts
impacting things
in a myriad of ways
it's one of the most versatile
tools that society has
and here's how
it's going to help and here's why
and here's why
my vision is unique
and here's why my vision stands out from the crowd
and
here's why I do what I do
and here's how it's going to change the world
do you want to see the world changing this way?
give me your resources let's partner together
let's paint a picture together
that's right
and that's
one of the biggest
mindset shifts
I think that we're just going to
figure out what our plan for funding is
your art doesn't matter
and art doesn't matter
to society
and I think one of the things that's really cool about grants
and funding in particular
if you have something that surprises them
a cool data point like this art does this
and you actually never thought about that
so do that
and that's helpful for people to go
oh shoot I never thought about that
that's great
let's see
the title is for change
it makes
people different
it makes communities different
hopefully in a better way
sometimes art doesn't
hopefully your art doesn't
hopefully you're expressing that art doesn't make your community full
it creates positive change
right
and that's what they just want to see
straight up
they just want to see the positive change you can create
they want that
they want that proof
or the confidence of the goals you've done before
you have a unique vision
there's this data that shows that your approach is actually really beneficial
here's the
process that we're going to do
that's really unique and shows my vision
and then here's the outcomes that we're going to
have to indicate
this isn't a research paper
you're not going to send this to some scientific journal
you're not looking for
you're not going to need control groups
your measurements are indicators
that you're moving the needle in the direction
that the partner wants to see
and that's really important
your creativity is valuable
obviously inherently and intangibly
that's where art's true value lives
but
there is tangible value
economic value
that gives a little bit
about
how to protect that value
so
first of all
can anyone read my shirt
it says
roots circa 2025
so
most of the art that's been in this
deck
all the stickers
the illustrations
they were all created by
7 to 12 year olds
in their national districts
during
a project that we did
with Rootsong Leadership Academy
New Mexico Black Leadership Council
last summer
when we talk
about creativity being valuable
literally 7 year olds
were
showing their creativity here
helping us tell a story
and if there's any
big parents in the room
hit me up because I owe you some money
because this was money I didn't spend on
stock images
this was for me part of community wealth
is showing the creativity beyond
communities right
so
I guess to go there and say
creativity is really valuable
in a meaningful way it's helping me tell a story
and real quick
does anyone know what IP stands for?
intellectual property
well one more time
there we go thank you
please
because intellectual property
like Jeff is getting at
the tangible
value of the art
and the reason
that it's worth talking about is
well
again because of
the ways which artists
myself included under value of art
sometimes we don't think
about the returning value
of things like
and to slide to me
that's part of being an intellectual property
so those are things that we should be very careful
about giving away
because if you go on to the next slide
one thing that can happen
when you don't protect intellectual property
is that
other people profit from it
so the reason that we use
the smiley face
is because like this was
a design that was created by
Harvey
Harvey Ball thank you
so Harvey Ball did it as
a work for hire
which for folks who don't know what that means
that means you create an illustration
and you don't find the rights to it
so they paid $45 for it
and now who hasn't
seen a smiley face and that smiley face
design ever?
from the 1970s
one of the things that was interesting
is as I was looking at
his work you can literally
buy a signed copy
of one of his prints
for almost $4,000
he's no longer alive
who's taking that $4,000?
is it Harvey? is it Harvey's estate?
so I mean
to go back to
that unnamed art collective
that we were talking about
that wasn't painted targets
if you pay attention
there's lots of folks
who have issues
issues where
the corporation that came out of that
art collective
now may sell their designs
in their shops
or show their work
all over the world at those trademarks
but the artists are the last
people to benefit from it
even though everyone else does
so I mean again
I'm not a lawyer but remember
this is a thing that's really worth
thinking about and talking about
and looking for that language
and contrast
if anyone has ever applied for
CYC
which is
basically the Santa Fe Youth
Department
a lot of them already have clauses that say
they own everything you make
if you ever work for a DCA
museum as a contractor
they'll want to own everything you make
just have a discussion
and make sure that you're comfortable
because that might literally mean
you were running up in the calendar
that they sell for $50
and you don't see
any money on it
so just really remember
that they are as valuable
and anything else you want to add Jeff?
Well yeah, one thing
I think that's really important
to think about too, that's another indication
is this right worth going after?
Is this an opportunity worth going after?
The thing I agree
Cool, yeah they can own it, they can own
whatever they want, that might be cool
but if that's not cool, make sure
you understand that before signing any contract
Cool, you got the award, great
you're not obligated to accept the award
is the
if you can, definitely get that kind of
relationship with that contractor, you're not obligated to
you see the contract is like everything you make
as a result of this award
belongs to us
that might be fine
but it might not be
you got $500, do this thing
and then go and own it, open it on the calendar
and you got $500, but we're going to make
$10,000 off of it, right?
Eh, might not be worth it
it's just that those are the things
that a lot of people don't think about
when they're going after funding
is ownership
and if you already have
you own your intellectual property
it's a lot stronger around
just standing on the door like
I'd love to accept this award, I already own this
so we're going to talk about that
I can loan you, I can lease you
I can give you a percentage
I can license it
so things like that
it's really important, that's just, yeah
we want to talk about that because it's not something you always think about
that's not true for every funding source
so read the contract
all those are really important, true for anything
but, yeah
Yeah, and the funders
who are super aligned
usually know who they're working with
I just started a residency
with Jake Sanofi
I didn't have to look for it
because James, who's a VD, was already like
you own everything that you make
versus some of the state contracts
where we have to start
a few week turnaround
so that we can just have a lawyer modify
one sentence
so the people who are really aligned
are often really aligned
and with that, I think we're
we have about 10 minutes of Q&A left
maybe 8 minutes
any questions?
and
maybe
I'm going to run Mark
so
I'll be right back
Well this
this is a good question
it is a recommendation
there's this really influential
speaker I'm sure about
because I've heard his name is Simon Sinek
and he's
a writer at Red Todd leadership
and business and stuff like that
and
there's a TED talk that says
how great readers is our action
and it's a great
it's one of the 10 best videos
motivational videos
and it goes into what you guys are talking about
from the
story course
and then to sort of
like the why and the how
and he was talking about advertising products
but this definitely applies to all this stuff too
and it's how to
hook people into your
product
in which you're serving
and there's also a class at UNF
that I would really recommend you guys take
it's called leadership for creatives
it's part of the arts leadership and business
minor at UNL
and
it was one of the most impactful classes
I ever took and a great instructor
I think was Professor James Cheen
and if you want to learn how to be a leader
you want to learn how to be a confident artist
and if you do learn how to be
a confident artist you want to bring yourself
above like the path of the art majors
that's true
yeah and artists are
like notorious for just cheating to themselves
and
that's going to be
a lot of their battles if they keep it
keep it like that
that's great thank you for those
yeah since Nick is great
talks a lot about too like
Apple and Mac
Apple doesn't sell
phones and computers, they sell
Macs and computers
and there's a big difference
got one question over here
it's not really a question
it's just that
financial property also applies to musicians
don't forget Chuck Berry
yes
I don't know what happened to Chuck Berry
but I assume it's what happens to
every artist which is they probably all screw
I'm going to get
one question here and one over there
keep your hands up so I can find you
afterwards
yeah
I have a question about
on grants
how specific do you
as far as
you know we went
$20,000 just for this one
program compared to
saying that you're going to stretch it out
and do all those different things with business
because you know a lot of the artists businesses
are very overrated
totally that's a great question
it depends on the funder
some funders will say this is a program
grant
some funders give you general operating
funds which means you can have funds
you can talk about
the general idea of what you said you were doing
and so then you can talk about anything you do
that aligns with the funder's vision
and don't talk about anything else
just talk about that stuff very specifically
so it kind of depends on the funder
and also depends on does it strengthen your case
to talk about the breadth of what you do
or does it strengthen your case to go deep
about that one thing because that makes such a deep impact
so the answer is
yes to both
but it kind of depends
one thing
whatever you call it
versus general operating
which gets more related
so one question over here
so you mentioned
IP and lawyers
can you give us a name
contact of an IP lawyer that we can
reach out to
or if you have a list
how would we find the best or really good
IP lawyer to talk to about this
I don't
but my guess is
talk to the creative industries division
and in
my case
I think we talked about fiscal sponsorship
in Jeff's last
session
but I did a
project that had a very
legal grade area
in the sense that I was actively trying to get sued
and having a fiscal sponsor
is essentially like
you're a non-profit that
adopts your projects
they were the ones who were basically like
hey we have IP lawyers and connections
and things to protect you
I don't have a specific
person but
that can be something that we send some
details around after
there's a law
for that I'm going to not get the name exactly right
but it's an EXO
law for small business
or an EXO small business
they're a really really good law firm that tries to
really have low cost services
also
there are some
I don't know, a Pegasus law firm
does some low cost stuff
but they might not do IP stuff specifically
but yeah creative industry divisions are
a good place to start
and this is not an endorsement but it sounds like
someone has a recommendation
SDDC actually has
a whole course
that you can get on
maybe a Sunday
where people talk
SBDC, small business
development center
and usually
wherever you are
I don't know
I think you're making it up
I have a lot of confusion
regarding trademark
yeah
to be honest
I
copyright
so please this is not legalized
my understanding of trademark is like
a slogan or a name
whereas copyright is like the work you produce
that
is my understanding
that I want to get practical
about that
Ken
you can put someone in
I don't have time
because I think we're keeping
we're the last thing before lunch
so we'll stick around
and talk more for folks
but does anyone feel like someone had a question?
I don't know
same
maybe last question
if you want to do a trademark
it's a complex process
if you just want to copyright
you just fill out a form
it's a letter of congress
and you don't have to register
or put the copyright symbol on
technically by law
when you make it
it's your copyright
unless you give it away
and that
when you give it away
that's why we're talking about
word for hire language
anything that has word for hire language
is specifically you giving away
your copyright
okay
our screen is a little bit small
so please take a photo
this QR code leads to
this presentation
has some resources
including
translation
I don't know if folks who know
who Roshon is
from Bible Spaces
but he wrote this really great
resource for translating
what he was an artist
to
how I can find my language
so like you're not a DJ
you are doing creative place making
so that you can really
align with
people's common priorities
and obviously our information
is there, please reach out
connect with us
and thank you so much for your work
thank you
give it up one more time for money
money money
thank you so much
I just want to let you know
that as you go to lunch
reminding you, your red ticket is for drinks
your color ticket is for
whatever color truck you have
to go to
so just remember that, it doesn't
confuse you, enjoy lunch, thank you
go
I missed the first part
I'm sorry, I'm Emily
by the way, I'm a co-ambassador